---
layout: paper
title: "Data augmentation via diffusion model to enhance AI fairness"
image: /images/papers/2025-03-18-dong-data-augmentation-diffusion.jpg
authors: Blow CH, Qian L, Gibson C, Obiomon P, Dong X
year: 2025
ref: Blow et al., Front. Artif. Intell. 18 March 2025, vol. 8 - 2025| | https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2025.1530397.
doi: 10.3389/frai.2025.1530397
github: 
pdf: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/artificial-intelligence/articles/10.3389/frai.2025.1530397/pdf
keywords: generative AI, AI fairness, AIF360, reweighting samples, COMPAS dataset, adult income dataset
PMID: 
PMCID: 
---

# Abstract

**Introduction**: AI fairness seeks to improve the transparency and explainability of AI systems by ensuring that their outcomes genuinely reflect the best interests of users. Data augmentation, which involves generating synthetic data from existing datasets, has gained significant attention as a solution to data scarcity. In particular, diffusion models have become a powerful technique for generating synthetic data, especially in fields like computer vision.

**Methods**: This paper explores the potential of diffusion models to generate synthetic tabular data to improve AI fairness. The Tabular Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (Tab-DDPM), a diffusion model adaptable to any tabular dataset and capable of handling various feature types, was utilized with different amounts of generated data for data augmentation. Additionally, reweighting samples from AIF360 was employed to further enhance AI fairness. Five traditional machine learning models—Decision Tree (DT), Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), and Random Forest (RF)—were used to validate the proposed approach.

**Results and discussion**: Experimental results demonstrate that the synthetic data generated by Tab-DDPM improves fairness in binary classification.

