---
layout: ccsbtalk
title: "[CCSB Seminar Series] Genome assembly process, challenges and application in research"
speaker: Noushin Ghaffari
speakerurl: 
photo: /images/talks/speakers/noushin-ghaffari.jpg
date: 2020-12-16
time: 12:00pm
venue: webinar/Zoom
webinar: https://pvpanther.zoom.us/j/97412787782?pwd=WkRYNEM0eTFBNXFURk95ZEswQXFPUT09
recording:
categories: [blog, talks]
tags: [ccsb-seminar]
event: CCSB-Seminar
---


## Abstract

In order to better understanding the molecular changes in any living organism, reconstructing its genome and transcriptome are crucial. In the recent years, many sophisticated assembly tools have been developed, which are still under improvement. The input materials for the assembly process are generated by modern sequencing technologies, which have enabled us to uncover the underlying genetic material for many species, including Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Drosophila melanogaster, and Arabidopsis thaliana plants. In this talk, I will describe the genome and transcriptome reconstruction processes/tools and discuss their applications in my research projects.


## Speaker Bio

Noushin Ghaffari is an Assistant Professor in the [Department of Computer Science](https://www.pvamu.edu/engineering/departments/cs/) at Prairie View A&M University. She joined PVAMU as a faculty after more than 10 years of successfully conducting research in the fields of computational biology, bioinformatics, High Performance Computing, data science and analytics. She employs her expertise in multidisciplinary research fields such as animal welfare, food security, genomics, and model development for biological and agricultural applications. Dr. Ghaffari is a certified Software Carpentry instructor, and organized and led the first three Software Carpentry Workshops at Texas A&M University.

